[MUSIC]
>> Douglas: Let me give you an analogy
from visual processing.
Visual processing is the opposite
of computer graphics.
It's where you take a signal from
a camera and analyze all the pixels and
try to determine what are all
the objects in the scene and
how are they all moving relative
to each other in the camera.
You need to be able to solve this problem
in order to walk in the world and
it's a really really difficult problem.
But we're all able to solve it.
And in fact all the animals
are able to solve it.
And the reason we're able to do that is
because we don't solve the general problem
because the general problem is hard.
Instead we solve special problems.
Problems which are much easier to solve,
but which sometimes give the wrong answer.
And we have techniques for
revealing the ways in which we get this
wrong, and we call them optical illusions.
So this is an illusion designed
by Edward Adelson of MIT.
And here we've got a checkerboard
with white squares and black squares.
And two of the squares are labeled A and
B.
And it turns out those two squares
are exactly the same color.
As some of you may be seeing that you
may believe that I'm telling you that,
but you're looking at that and one is
clearly white and one is clearly black.
But in fact they are both that color,
they're both that shade of neutral gray.
in fact if I overlay my
square on top of the picture.
If A and B were different colors.
Then you should see some
break in continuity, right,
you should see some edge forming and
you don't.
Now many of you may be seeing a gradient.
Who is seeing a gradient here?
Seeing the colors going from black and
white, that come on.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Your brain is lying to you,
that there's not a gradient.
It is that color,
it is a solid colored square.
You know the truth of this image and
yet you still can't see it correctly.
It's because there's another part of your
brain that Kahneman doesn't talk about
which deals with inconstancy,
which is a really important thing to
have because if a computer
system becomes inconsistent,
there's a really good chance
it's going to fail, right?
It's just [INAUDIBLE] boom.
And biological systems can't afford
to fail when they get confused.
So instead we've got this system,
which will reject information which is
coming from the world through our senses
if it contradicts our internal state.
And that's why you cannot
see this correctly.
Because it is altering what you are seeing
with your eyes in order to conform
with your patterns of image processing.
And it turns out we do this all the time,
it's not just in the visual system,
it's in everything.
And that's why we argue so
much because we literally cannot hear
what the other person is saying.
The other person is saying something
which contradicts us then we will
misinterpret what they're saying,
it's not intentional,
it's just part of what we're doing
in order to resist inconsistency.
And this is the mechanism.
So it turns out none of this was
news to the advertising industry.
They had figured out a long
time ago that they could
design messages which would bypass
the head that would go straight to the gut
convincing us that we have to
buy things that we don't need.
They've been doing this for
a long, long time.
What Kahneman does is provide the theory
which explains why that works.
And I don't think anybody understood
this better than the tobacco industry.
Cuz you look at tobacco, okay,
so how do you sell tobacco?
What what does tobacco do?
It makes you smell bad, it turns your
teeth yellow, it makes you sick, and
then it kills you.
So how do you convince people,
yeah, let's buy some tobacco.
And they do it by creating messages
which are able to confuse system 1.
System 1 is easily confused
about the difference between
slow death and good for you.
So that is the equipment that we have for
writing computer programming or
for writing computer programs.
And programs are the most
complicated things that humans make.
There's nothing else in human experience
which is composed of as many tiny little
pieces which all have to go together
perfectly that have to work In real time
with changing states and
changing inputs in a dynamic situation.
Nothing else comes anywhere close to
the complexity that we have in software.
And it's amazing that
we're able to manage this.
But it's really hard.
So when the first Von Neumann
machine started coming online,
and it was discovered programming
is really, really difficult.
So there was a lot of thinking that we
need to figure out a way in order to make
it easier.
In fact to make it unnecessary because
otherwise the computers are not much
use to us.
And so that started research
in artificial intelligence.
And the goal of artificial
intelligence originally was to
figure out a way to have the computers
write their own programs,
because it was just too hard
to have humans writing them.
AI has had a lot of amazing successes but
they have failed completely at their
original mission, that you cannot
give a problem to a computer and
ask it to write the program
that solves that problem.
If it were then we would ask the computer,
well write a program that's
better than you and keep doing that
until they become our overlords.
And that hasn't happened, computers
don't know how to write programs, so
we write them.
So as a result of the failure of AI,
we are still writing programs by hand.
>> Douglas: So
the most important tool we have for
doing programming is
the programming language.
Because one thing that computers are
really good at, is translating one formal
language into another formal language and
that's what programming languages do.
They allow us to write at increasing
higher levels of abstraction,
where we get more leverage where we
can create more work with less effort.
And then the computer or
through the programming language
figures out how to convert it into
a form that the computer can execute.
And so programming languages are really,
really important.
The thing that makes programming so
extremely difficult is the requirement for
perfection.
Programs have to be absolutely
perfect in every aspect,
in every detail for all possible inputs,
for all possible states for all time.
And the contract we have with
the computer, is that if a program
is not perfect in all of those ways,
the computer has licensed to do the worst
possible thing at the worst possible
time and it is not the computer's fault.
Whose fault is it?
It's your fault.
Why did you give us a program
which you knew wasn't perfect?
So you'd think well okay, because
of that requirement for perfection,
we would never release a program to
production until we know it's perfect.
And we don't do that for
two really good reasons.
The first one is, we would never
release a program to production, and
eventually management would figure, or
why are we paying these guys, they never
finish, let's figure out something else.
But the second reason is
much more insidious and
that is we have no test for perfection.
It may be that someone once
created a complex program
that actually was perfect,
there is no way to know.
There is no test for perfection.
We have tests for imperfection but
no tests for perfection, so
there's just no way to tell.
Now, it's most likely that none
of our programs are perfect.
And so what we do is we put our
programs into production hoping that
we'll discover what's wrong with it and
fix it before anyone else finds out,
which is crazy, but
that is the state of the art.
That is the best we have
figured out how to do.
So we're doing this work with
the brains of hunters and gatherers.
And this is not a metaphor.
Our brains have not evolved
since the last ice age.
And there was nothing in that
experience to have prepared us for
computer programming.
Hunting and gathering required
a completely different set of skills.
So, it's kind of amazing that
we're able to do this at all.
It's sort of lucky, but
there is nothing in our evolution which
has prepared us for that.
So we're making use of everything
we have in order to do this.
So programming obviously is making use of
the head, of system 2 because that's where
the algorithms live,
that's where we do the analytical stuff,
that's where we do the logic in the state
and the dynamics, all of that stuff.
But we don't understand how we do it.
You have all figured it out but
not well enough that you can write
down a list of instructions.
This is how you write a computer program,
you do these things, and
hand it to someone else and
they can read it and follow the steps and
then they can write programs.
We can't do that.
Somehow we have all figured it out.
But not well enough that we could
tell someone else how to do it.
And that's why we can't tell the machines
how to do it because if we can tell other
human how to do it then we can tell
machine how to do it, and we don't know.
And much of what we're doing
involves intuition because
we're always making tradeoffs.
It's never clear what the best approach
to solving a problem is going to be.
And usually we're trying to solve a
problem with incomplete knowledge of what
the solution is gong to be.
And so we have to guess, and
system 2 is not good at guessing,
system 1 loves to guess.
System 1 will guess without knowing
it's guessing, it's great at that.
And so we look at a problem and
we'll look at it top down and
bottom up and
take a macro view and micro view.
We keep constantly shifting our point of
view until eventually a program emerges.
And we don't know how we do that.
So system 2 is obviously involved but
I think system
1 is involved there as well, that's part
of the reason why we can't document it.
Now I have no evidence to support that
argument but my gut tells me it's true.
So I believe it.